
 welcome to the spoken tutorial on classes and objects in c++.
 in this tutorial we will learn,
classes.
objects.
encapsulation. and
data abstraction.
we will do this with the help of an example.

 to record this tutorial, i am using
ubuntu os version 11.10
g++ compiler version 4.6.1

 let us start with the introduction to classes.
class is created using a keyword class
it holds data and functions.
class links the code and data.
the data and functions of the class are called as members of the class.

 let us move on to objects.
objects are variables.
they are the copy of a class.
each of them has properties and behavior.
properties are defined through data elements.
and
behavior is defined through member functions called methods.

 now let us see the syntax for a class

class class-name
{
public: 
(public member functions)
};
here, class is a keyword used to define a class.
class-name is the name of the class.
public, private and protected are the access specifier.
and here we have defined the data members and the member functions 
as public, private and protected.
this is how we close the class.

 now let us see an example
i have already typed the code on the editor.
i will open it.

 note that our filename is name class-obj.cpp
in this example we will calculate the area of a square using class.
let me explain the code now.

 this is our header file as iostream.
 here we are using the std namespace



 this is declaration for a class named square.

here i have not declared any access specifier.
so by default it is private.
hence variable x is a private member of class square.

 this is the public specifier
function area is a public function.
and this is how we close the class.
now let us move back to our slides to know more about the access specifiers.

 public specifier
the public specifier allows the data to be accessed outside the class.
a public member can be used anywhere in the program.

 private specifier
the members declared as private cannot be used or accessed outside the class.
private members can be used only by the members of the class.

 protected specifier
protected members cannot be accessed from outside the class.
they can be accessed by a derived class.
let us move back to our program.

 here in this statement we have the class name
the scope resolution operator and the function name.
we must use this operator.
it specifies that function area is not a global function.
it is a member function of class square.

 here we have passed an argument as int a.
now let us switch back to the slides to know more about the scope resolution operator.

 it is used to access the hidden data.
to access the variable or function with the same name we use the scope resolution  operator ::.
suppose the local variable and the global variable have same name.
the local variable gets the priority.
we can access the global variable using scope resolution :: operator.

 now switch to our program.
 here the value of a is stored in x


 then we return the area of the square
here x is a private member.
to access the private parameter we used the public member a.
private members are always hidden.

 this is our main function.
 here, sqr is the object of class square.
this is how we create an object
class-name followed by the object-name

 here we call the function area using the object sqr and a (dot). operator.
then we pass an argument as 4.
we set the value of x as 4. 

 this is our return statement
 now click on save
 let us execute the program.
 open the terminal window by pressing ctrl, alt and t keys simultaneously on your keyboard.
 to compile type
g++ space class-obj.cpp space -o space class
press enter
type
./class
press enter

 the output is displayed as:
area of the square: 16

now let us move back to our program.


 so far now we have seen,
the data and functions combined together in a class.
class is a single unit.
in which the data and the function using them is grouped.
this mechanism is called as encapsulation.
then we have seen class with the  private and public members.
the private data is hidden.
it cannot be accessed outside the class.
this mechanism is called as data abstraction.
the interface is seen but the implementation is hidden.

 this brings us to the end of this tutorial.
let us move back to our slides.

 let us summarize
in this tutorial we have learnt,
encapsulation
data abstraction
private members

int x;

public functions

int area(int);

classes

class square

to create object-name

square sqr;

to call a function using object

sqr.area(); 

 as an assignment
write a program to find the perimeter of a given circle.

 watch the video available at the link shown below
it summarizes the spoken tutorial project 
if you do not have good bandwidth, you can download and watch it

 the spoken tutorial project team
conducts workshops using spoken tutorials 
gives certificates to those who pass an online test 
for more details, please write to,
contact@spoken-tutorial.org

 spoken tutorial project is a part of the talk to a teacher project
it is supported by the national mission on education through ict, mhrd, government of india
more information on this mission is available at the link shown below: http://spoken-tutorial.org\nmeict-intro

 this is ashwini patil from iit bombay signing off
thank you for joining. 


            