in this tutorial, you will be able to: create account, edit account, delete account. in this tutorial, i am using abt 1.0, android 4.2 (jelly bean) rooted tablet for this tutorial, you must be familiar with: the principles of book keeping, how to run and start abt and how to create a new organization, select abt application on android 4.2 we will see abt's welcome screen. we will choose free accounting foundation from select existing organization button. now, let's tap on login button and go ahead to the login screen. select admin for role. enter username and password for admin. login as admin. we are now on the master menu of abt. tap on create account menu. when you enter this page for the first time, the alert-box appears on the screen. the alert prompts a dialog to set account code type i.e. manual or automated. for manual account code, check the check-box. tap on confirm button. remember, this is only one time activity. this is create account page. an organization can have any number of accounts. every account falls under a group and optionally a sub-group. all the group names are available in group name drop-down. this organization is of the type ngo.
if organization type is ngo, it will include corpus in the list, or else capital. the accounts will have credit opening balance under groups: corpus,current liability, loans(liability) & reserves. corpus is the principal amount of an ngo or a trust. capital is the amount invested in the business by the owner. liabilities denote the amount which a business owes to a another firm/person. the accounts will have debit opening balance under groups: current asset, fixed assets, loans (asset), investment, miscellaneous expenses(asset), fixed assets represent everything which a business owns and has money value. it is an asset used in business, for more than one year. they are always shown as debit balance. accounts under groups: direct expense, direct income, indirect expense, indirect income will have zero opening balance. direct expenses are expenses related to production and purchasing of goods. direct income is earned from the business or for the services provided. indirect expenses - expenses incurred after the manufacturing process is over. indirect income is one that is earned by way of non-business activities. example sale of old newspaper, sale of cartons. i will choose current asset as group name. depending upon the group, select required subgroup.  